Hi, I hope you're doing great today.
It's been some time since I last
added a new video to this course,
so I thought it was about time to do just that.
So a lot of stuff has been added to CSS
over the last couple of years,
so this seems like a great time
to show you a bit of what's new in CSS.
So first up, we have a lot of new properties
and techniques in CSS now,
stuff like more complex gradients, shapes, clips, masks,
background blending, image filters, CSS variables,
truly responsive images, and so much more.
It's really incredible.
And with these new properties,
we can build even more compelling designs
just using the power of CSS.
So again, it really has become powerful over the last year.
Alright?
Now as we're actually laying out elements on the page,
for a long time, we've been using floats
to build layouts, right?
So just like you learned in this course.
And that technique is, of course, still 100% valid,
but it always actually had a small problem.
It was always a bit hacky, so to say,
because floats were not originally invented
to build layouts.
It's also a bit difficult sometimes to build layouts
and page components just using floats,
and that is why amazing new ways of laying out elements
were introduced into CSS over the last couple of years,
and these are Flexbox and CSS grid.
So Flexbox is an amazing new technology that allows us
to lay out elements in a one dimensional row
without using floats or other hacks like that.
It makes it so easy to place elements exactly where we
want them to be with just a very small amount of code,
making Flexbox perfect for building small page components
like navigation or carts.
Now about CSS grid,
it's an even more cutting edge technology that we use
to lay out elements in a fully fledged two dimensional grid,
and some people say it's a bit like tables,
but it's actually much more powerful than that.
So since we can use a real two dimensional grid,
CSS grid is absolutely perfect
for building big overall page layouts
and more complex components.
Again, with a lot less CSS code
and even HTML code than before.
Now the biggest limitation of all these new features is,
as always, browser support.
While new versions of all browsers
already support everything I mentioned here,
there are always some users that lag behind
and don't have the latest versions installed.
Now imagine we rely on CSS grid to entirely lay out a page,
and then like 5% of our users
actually don't support CSS grid.
That would then make our website
impossible to use for these people.
That's why we have to be very careful
in adopting this new modern stuff
and always have a really good idea
of what our target audience looks like
in terms of browser usage.
Alright?
Now since I cannot really show you all of this
in just one video of course,
I'm only gonna introduce you to Flexbox right now.
That's because if I were to learn
only one of these technologies,
then it would be definitely Flexbox,
because it's had by far the biggest impact
on my own personal work.
It really makes a huge difference to me and my work,
and browser support is actually pretty good right now,
which makes it a perfect technology
to start using right now in my opinion.
Now before we actually start using it in practice,
I want to just give you an overview
of all the CSS properties that are part
of the Flexbox specification.
I have all the property names here
and then all the possible values
where the bold one is the default one, right?
I'm not gonna go over these right now,
but it's a good reference for you to print out or create
just a print screen image so that you can keep it handy
and check it as we build our example
throughout the rest of this video.
Now what I do want to focus on right now is that
in Flexbox we can define an element as a flex container,
and then all the child elements will become flex items.
Now each flex container has a main axis,
as you can see in the diagram in the top,
and along this main axis,
all of the flex items can be aligned in some way.
Then there's also the cross axis,
which is always perpendicular to the main axis,
and we can also align items along this axis.
And we can control all of this using the properties
that you can see here on this slide.
Alright?
But enough talking now, because this sounds more complicated
than it actually is, okay?
So let's now actually build a very small component
using the power of Flexbox in practice.
So this is a small component that we're gonna build
using Flexbox, and it's like this pizza cart here.
So imagine there was like a web application
where you could order pizza,
and then it could show each of the pizzas
using this cart component right here.
Alright?
Now as you see here,
I'm doing this on like a web application called CodePen
where we have the HTML and CSS code up here,
and then down here we see the result,
instead of doing it in a text editor
like we did the other project in this course.
Okay?
So usually, we always code in a text editor,
but to code up these small examples like these demos,
I like to use a web tool like this,
because then we don't have to go
through all these setup steps,
and so it's a lot quicker
to just quickly code up something like this.
Now if you want, of course, you can open up your text editor
and then create a new HTML file and a new CSS file
and do it the more traditional way
like we did in this course as well.
So what I did here was to start a new CodePen,
so this one here,
and if you want to do it yourself,
you can just head over to CodePen dot io,
then you probably have to create a new account,
and then just go to new pen.
Okay?
Now we don't need to JavaScript, so we can just minimize it,
and so here we go.
We have HTML and CSS.
And let's start with some of the setup,
just like we did in the Omnifood project.
So we have our universal selector,
and then we will simply start
by setting the margin and padding to zero,
so basically do this reset that we also did in our project.
So margin zero, padding zero,
and also we set box sizing to border box.
Border box, okay.
Let's just write something here in the HTML
so that it actually shows up down here.
So here we go.
And so now let's define some styles for the HTML
and the body, just like we're already used to.
Right?
So let's set the text color to four four four like this,
and we also want a special font family.
So we want the font called Roboto, which is on Google Fonts.
So again, just like we did on our Omnifood project.
So let's go to Google Fonts here,
type in Roboto,
and so this is the one here.
Just hit this plus here,
and probably this now looks a bit different
than by the time I recorded the rest of the course,
but it still works the same actually.
And so now we want to embed this font,
and we're not going to do it in the HTML
like we did with this link element.
But instead, we're going to import it right into CSS.
So just go ahead and copy this line of code here.
We can now close this,
and right at the beginning of everything here,
we then import this font to our CSS document.
And now we can go ahead and say font family,
Roboto.
And if you wait a bit,
now you see that it actually changed down here.
Okay?
Can also give it some nice padding of 100 pixel,
and now let's take care of that gradient that we have here.
So this green to blue nice modern looking gradient
that we have.
Alright?
So as a comment here, let's define a couple of colors,
because we will be using these over and over again,
and so I think it makes sense to basically write them
down here so we can then come here and copy them.
So for green, we have six seven B two six F,
then we have our blue color,
which is a hexadecimal four C A, four C A, two C D.
But then one that's kind of in between, so the mid-color,
let's say, and this one is five A A A nine D.
Okay, so let's define this gradient.
So background, and we want a linear gradient.
And we did this also in a course again.
So at this point, it's nothing new.
So we define the two colors that we want,
and we start with the green one.
So we catch this one,
and going to the blue color.
Let's see, and here we go.
Now you see that this green here is going actually
from the top to the bottom down here.
Right, you see that?
But here, we actually have it starting here in this corner
going to this corner.
And so we can do something that we didn't do before,
which is to specify the direction in here.
So we can say now to bottom right.
And now you will see that it starts here and goes here.
We could also say to the bottom left, for example,
and now you will see that it will start here.
So here's the green now, and then here to the blue.
So that's the direction it goes.
Okay, make sense?
But we want it to go to the bottom right.
And to see this a bit better, let's actually give us
some more space here and maximize this window.
Alright, so that's nicer.
Okay, and so you see that now
when we increase or decrease this here,
you see that it kind of goes from here to here,
and then it starts over again.
And we don't want that to happen, so we want that our body,
because basically all of this here is the body, right?
We want that to always have the height of the viewport.
And remember how we do that.
So we actually did it before in the Omnifood project.
And the way we do it is to use the 100
and then the V H unit.
So 100% of the vertical height.
And now you see that it actually works,
except for these small problems down here,
but we're gonna fix them here in a second,
so don't worry about that.
So I'm not sure what's causing them.
Maybe it's a problem here with this web application,
but that's no problem, again, don't worry about that.
So instead, let's just start with our HTML part here.
And so I'm gonna use a figure with the class of pizza.
Alright, down in there,
let's see what we have in there actually in our example.
And now the tabs are gone.
Okay, so let's bring it back to the way it was.
So we have this entire element here,
which is this figure, which is a pizza, right?
And then in there,
we have this element for the image and this element,
so this container and then the element with the price.
Okay?
So basically three elements side by side.
So let's do that.
So we have a diff with the class of pizza hero,
and now I'm gonna introduce you to something new,
because this way of writing a class
probably looks pretty weird to you, right,
these two underscores, right?
And that is the so-called BEM methodology,
where B stands for block, E stands for elements,
and M stands for modifier.
So our block here is pizza, and then each of the elements
in there will have the block name on them.
So the block will always be there, then two underscores,
and then the element, which in this case is the hero.
And if we have multiple elements with the same name,
but we want, for example,
one of them to be slightly different, so be a bit modified,
we can use a modifier by using dash dash,
for example, type one, something like this.
Okay?
But here, we just have our block, which is the pizza,
and then the element is hero, okay?
And this makes it a lot easier to write CSS class names.
Instead of having to always come up with them,
we have this system that makes it a bit easier
for us to always name our classes like this.
Okay?
Then in here, we will have our image.
So where does this image come from?
Well I'm using it from the very popular website
called Unsplash dot com.
So Unsplash dot com,
and there we have tons of images that we can use.
Okay?
So I just used this pizza one, but if you wanna find it,
you can just type in pizza in here,
and then it's gonna come up somewhere down here I guess.
Yep, here we go.
And I'll just click here,
and instead of having to download it,
I will simply copy the image address,
and paste that one here.
You see?
And so now it will basically get the image from this URL.
Alright, so that is the image.
We should probably give it an alternative text
saying that it's a pizza,
and then also a class name so we can actually style it.
And this one is called, and again,
we have the pizza block here, underscore underscore image.
Okay, very simple, very straightforward.
The next up we have the contents, so the part in the middle
where we have all the text and all the description.
So this is a diff with the class of pizza
content.
Let me just write it here,
content,
and then close it up.
And then the last part, which is the price,
go ahead and copy this one,
so pizza price.
And actually, I can already type the correct price in here,
which will be $11.99.
Okay, and let's now style this a bit,
starting with the image here.
So in responsive images, or in responsive we design usually,
we always wanna give it a width of 100%.
Alright?
And then down here somewhere,
we have the content and the price.
Okay?
So pizza content and pizza price.
And so now, let's start using Flexbox
for the very first time.
So we're gonna do that on the pizza element.
And now remember what I said in the slide
about the Flexbox properties,
that we can define each element as a Flexbox container,
and so that's what we're gonna do here.
So this pizza element here will be the Flexbox container,
and the three child elements,
which are the hero, the content, and the price,
will be the flex items that we then
can align using Flexbox properties.
Okay?
And to define a Flexbox container,
all we have to do is to say display, flex.
And then, like magic,
all of the elements will appear side by side.
Okay?
So automatically everything's now side by side like this.
So awesome.
That's really a great first step already.
Of course it needs a lot of work still,
and so let's continue with that.
And so I'm gonna put all of these selectors here now.
So we have pizza hero.
Let me actually copy that so
I don't have to write it out all the time.
So we have the pizza hero, then we have the content,
and also the price.
Give it quickly a background of white.
And the last one has also this gradient.
So this linear gradient.
But it actually doesn't go to the bottom right.
It should just go to the bottom.
Okay now you see it starts at the green
and goes down to blue.
Alright, and all of this here still looks a bit weird,
so let's get rid of this HTML here.
Actually, all we really want to style here is the body.
So it's no problem to do it like this.
And so that looks a bit better already.
Let's then define some properties
for the pizza container here.
So a max width of 800 pixels.
So this cart should only have 800 pixels,
a border radius of four pixel,
and then also a nice box shadow, so that looks a bit nicer.
Alright?
So 30 pixel, and you can experiment with this
as you wish in order to see a different result.
So R G B A zero zero zero and point two.
Okay?
So basically, this is the shadow in the X direction,
so like this.
This is the shadow in the Y direction,
so basically from top to bottom.
This is the amount of blur,
and this is how far the blur
should come out of the element basically.
And then finally, this is the color,
so black with a 20% opacity.
And you see it, now we have this nice shadow here.
So that's for a piece element for now.
Let's now fix the worst problem that we have here,
which is this all too big image.
Okay?
So this pizza hero here,
which is the element that holds this image,
which has a width of 100%.
Alright?
So this pizza hero, we want this to only have about 50%
of the width of this entire container.
So what could we do?
Well we would go ahead and say width of 50%, right,
or 45% let's say.
But when we're dealing with Flexbox elements,
we're not doing it like that.
Instead, we're using the flex property.
And the flex property can take three values,
as you can see from your cheat sheet,
so from the slide that I told you to print
or to create a print screen.
So you see that we have flex grow,
flex string, and flex basis.
And flex basis is where we define the width
of the element if we want.
So it's totally optional, but in this case,
that's what we want to do.
Okay?
So we say that we want flex grow to zero,
flex string to one, which is the default, and then here,
instead of auto, which is the default, we want 45%.
Okay?
And so now you will see that it only occupies 45%.
Then for the price, we wanna do something similar.
So zero, one, and then the width.
Remember, so the width is the third value here.
And for this one, we want to have a width of 50 pixels.
So it doesn't have to be percentage of course.
Okay, so now this has 50 pixels here.
Perfect.
Now how do we actually make it so
that this other element here occupies the rest of the space?
Well that's where the magic of Flexbox comes in again.
So it is this pizza content here,
and now what we can do here
is to allow the element to grow as much as it can.
And so here we're going to use flex,
set it to one, and that's it, and wait for it.
And yeah, so now it has all the space that it can occupy.
So what's not in the pizza or in the price
will now be occupied with the content.
And if this sounds a bit confusing, then please just look
at the element table that I showed you before.
Okay?
So again, we have this flex property
where the first value is flex grow.
And in this case, we don't allow the element
to grow anything.
Then the second one is shrink,
and we could also actually set this one to zero,
because we don't want to shrink this element.
It should always just be 50 pixels.
Okay?
But it in fact many times
just doesn't make much of a difference.
So here I'm gonna set it to zero as well,
because I don't want it to shrink.
Okay, so that's what this zero or this one means.
And finally, we define the flex basis,
which is basically the width of the element that we want.
But we can also not define all of this,
but only define the first one,
and then just defines the flex grow.
So having flex or having flex grow equal to one
is actually the exact same thing,
but it's a good practice to use it like this.
Here we could also use a flex basis like this
and set it to 45%, just like this.
But again, it's a good practice
to always just use the flex property.
I'm not really sure why, but that's how it's been defined.
Okay, so the magic here again is this flex set to one,
which will make it so that all of the space that was empty
before is now occupied by this element,
because we allow it to grow as much as it can
by using flex zero.
So if it was zero again, now we would have this.
But with flex one, it grows as much as it can.
So let's say we had zero here, and then the price,
we would have the one now here,
and you will now see that it occupied
all of this space here,
so from here to here, all of the remaining empty space.
Right?
What we don't want as, we want it to be here,
and so that looks a lot better now.
Alright, so this looks quite nice already.
Let's get rid of this space here,
and all we have to do is to say display block.
So we had that problem in the other project as well.
So always set images to display block.
Okay, so let me now show you
a little bit more of the Flexbox magic.
Okay?
So remember that I said that there's
always a main axis and a cross axis.
So the main axis is in this direction here
that I'm moving the mouse now.
And the cross axis is perpendicular to that,
so from top to bottom, usually.
We can actually change that,
but more about that a bit later.
Okay?
So this is usually the main axis,
and this is the cross axis.
And we can align items along these axis, okay?
So let me show you that on the pizza element, okay?
Just let's get rid a bit of this padding here,
create it to 50, okay.
So that's better, it gives us a bit more space again.
Can also freeze it here again,
and so yeah, that's better now.
Okay, now if you want to align these items
along one of the axis,
we do it always on the flex container.
Okay?
And that's why in the property overview I have
some properties on a container side
and some items on the item side.
Okay?
So on the flex items, we use properties like flex.
Okay, so remember, pizza hero is a flex item,
and so that's where we use the flex property.
But the flex container is the one
where we have display set to flex,
and this is where we can align the items.
So let's start with something called align items
and set it to center, and let's see what happens.
And here you go.
So you see that now all the items
are basically aligned along one line here,
and so they're aligned along the cross axis.
So on this cross axis here, if you imagine this axis,
they are now in the middle,
so in the center, of the cross axis.
Okay?
So that is align items center.
So align items is always along the cross axis,
but there are actually other values,
again, as you can see on that cheat sheet.
So align items can also for example be flex end,
and so now they will be moved all the way to the end.
Okay?
There of course we have flex start,
which is basically the top,
and so they're moving to the top of the cross axis.
Okay, so again, we're talking about the cross axis here.
Okay, and the default here is stretch.
So if you don't specify anything,
they will be stretched like this.
That sorta basically stretch
and occupy all of the empty space that there is available.
Now if you want something to behave in a different way,
you can also specify the alignment on one item.
And in order to do that,
we use align self instead of align items.
So align items does it for all of the elements
that are in the flex container,
and if you want to then change one individually,
we can use align self.
So imagine we wanted to do that for the price,
we could simply say
align self,
and then this one here to center.
And only this one will then be centered
along the cross axis.
Okay, so just like this.
Now we don't want that.
I just wanted to show you that we can actually do it.
Okay, and so that actually gives us a nice tool
to vertically center elements.
So let's now go ahead and center this container here
in this viewport, so inside of the body.
So how are we gonna do that?
Well it's very simple.
We can simply turn the body into a flex container,
and now this element here will be the flex item.
Okay?
And if you want to now vertically center it,
all we have to do, as we already learned,
is to use align items, which in this case is just one,
but that's no problem, and it will now be centered.
And you see, as I'm changing the viewport,
it always stays in the center.
Great.
So you see that it's perfectly acceptable
that a flex container contains only one flex item.
Okay, so it's absolutely no problem, works just like this.
And actually we use it all the time like this.
So we talked about aligning items along the cross axis,
but what about the main axis, so this axis.
That is where the justify content property comes into play.
So align items is for,
and I will actually write it down here,
is for the cross axis,
and justify content is for the main axis.
Okay, so let's now again use center,
and what do you think will happen?
And actually, very simple answer,
it now centered this basically horizontally
along the main axis.
Great.
Now here we could also use flex end, for example,
if we want it on the right side
and flex start for the left side,
but that's not really necessary.
There are some other possibilities
and some quite important ones,
but they only work if we have multiple elements,
and so I'm gonna show them to you a bit later.
Anyway, I believe that these three properties here,
or actually these two here,
they are the single most important properties
that you need to understand in order to use Flexbox.
So if you knew when to use these two properties,
you'll be way on your way
to start using Flexbox in practice.
And I know that this is a lot to take in
and that it probably sounds a bit confusing,
but remember that this is just a crash course.
I just wanted to introduce this technology to you
with a nice and simple small example project,
but you should definitely go ahead and experiment
and try everything out on your own
after watching this video.
Okay?
So we're gonna come back to these properties here later,
many times actually, because we're gonna use lots
of flex containers in this project.
Okay?
I'm just noticing here that the border radius
is not really showing, and that's because the image here
is actually overflowing its container now.
And so we did this before in the other project,
we just set overflow to hidden,
and that will basically clip out these overflows.
Okay, so let's now take care of this price here.
So this would actually have a wide text,
and it should be rotated,
so basically written vertically, okay?
And so in CSS, there's a property for that,
and it is called writing mode.
Okay?
And so we can say it vertical right left, just like this.
And so just like that, our text is now written vertically.
You see that even the cursor here changes its position
when we hover this text.
Okay?
It should also have a wide text,
so wide and a font size of 18 pixels.
And now we need to use the magic of Flexbox again
in order to center this text in its container.
Okay?
And that's something that we didn't talk about yet,
which is that if you define an element as a flex container
that has actually no elements in it,
so like in this case it only has text,
well then this text basically becomes the flex item.
So if we now say display flex,
and we say align items,
and set it to center,
you will see that it now centered the text.
And actually it did it in this direction,
but that's because we're writing the text
in this different orientation.
So if we got rid of this piece here of code,
so if the text was just normal,
then we would see the normal behavior
of it being centered along the cross axis.
Okay, so vertically basically.
But since we are changing the writing mode here,
that also changes the direction.
So the cross axis is now this here,
and the main axis is in this direction.
So justify content to center it in both directions,
and now you will see it right in the middle.
So perfect.
So you will see this pattern many times
where you define an element as a flex container
and then simply align items
and justify content both to center,
and it will center all of the elements right in the middle.
Okay, so that looks already pretty nice.
Let's just take a quick break here,
and maybe you can review the code that we wrote already
and go over that property overview again
to better understand the properties that we used so far.
But the main thing that you really need to understand
is the axis, so the main axis and the cross axis,
and how we can align different items along these axis.
And so for that,
we so far used align items and justify content.
Okay, so let's take a break and come back in a second to
then create this middle part here using a lot more Flexbox.
See you then.